+++
title = "What's in for this year?"
date = 2023-01-01
tags = ["shorts", "misc"]
+++

New year often means new resolutions. Of course one does not need to wait for Jan 1st to start improving their lives, but it's still nice to have this calendar milestone to check what was accomplished, and most importantly what's to come. In that spirit, here is an unordered list of the main things I want to focus on in 2023.

## Generative AI

Yes, it is overhyped right now, and unless you've been living under a rock for the past few months you must have heard of [ChatGPT](https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/), [Stable Diffusion](https://github.com/CompVis/stable-diffusion) or [Midjourney](https://www.midjourney.com/showcase/recent/). They are all part of the family of [*generative models*](https://openai.com/blog/generative-models/), and simply put, they allow users to create text or images derived from a prompt they provide.  I don't have a strong opinion on their usefulness and there are plenty of articles out there that elaborate on how they can be used for good or bad, but what piques my interest is the underlying stack on which the resulting applications are/will be built. Before asking for a fancy picture of a astronaut on a horse, you have to provision GPU-based infrastructure, load the model and provide an interface to the user so that they can write their prompt and retrieve the results. IMHO more and more companies will start offering generative AI as a service in 2023 and beyond, but as a hobbyist it could be an interesting challenge to build your own tooling, there are certainly lots of valuable things to learn along the way.

## Systems programming & looking under the hood

I started learning about computer from the bottom of the stack, "close to the metal" as some may say. A few years later, I now understand that to fully understand how your code is run and why it sometimes fails, well you need to go back to the basics and thus have a good understanding of the fundamentals. Last year I gave a talk on the DataFrames interface and its various implementations, the most popular by far being [pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/), and when preparing the slides I found myself looking up unexpected things like [SIMD architecture](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/SIMD) or [pointer chasing](https://en.wikichip.org/wiki/pointer_chasing). I had little time to wrap up my presentation and I felt frustrated not being able to dig deeper into this kind of topics, so this year I want to take more time to read about *systems programming* and maybe write a bit of low-level code.

## Personal productivity and good habits

2022 was a tiresome year for me, especially on the professional side: I started managing a small team while keeping on contributing individually to several projects. That resulted in a poor work-life balance which took its toll at the end of the year. The goal for 2023 will not be to work *less*, but to work *better*, i.e. better prioritizing tasks, resting more often, and overall adopting a better methodology to make the best out of a day's work. 

## More reading, more writing !

So many things to read, so little time! Paradoxically, having access to more content made me *read less* over the past few years, so this year I'll change my approach a bit, reading no more that a few books concurrently, and making sure that they cover a diverse enough panel of topics. And the most important thing: I'll make sure to finish every book I start. For the writing part, it's simple: I bet on this blog to increase and improve my output :) 

Now off we go towards 2023, happy new year to all of you! 
